docs/materialisation-guide.md, before:

# Materialisation Guide

How to choose the right materialisation for your models. This project runs on Snowflake, so guidance here is specific to Snowflake behaviour.

For an introduction to the model layers and when each is used, see the [Modelling Guide](modelling-guide.md).

## Quick Reference

| Materialisation | Creates | Rebuild cost | When to use |
|-----------------|---------|-------------|-------------|
| `view` | SQL view | None (query-time) | Staging models, lightweight transforms |
| `table` | Physical table | Full rebuild each run | Most modelling and reporting models |
| `incremental` | Physical table | Partial rebuild | Large datasets with clear "new data" logic |
| `ephemeral` | Nothing (CTE) | None | One-off intermediate logic, not needed in database |

## View

A view stores the SQL definition but no data. Every time someone queries the view, Snowflake runs the underlying SQL.

```sql
{{ config(materialized='view') }}

select
    key_column,
    cast(date_column as date) as date_column
from {{ ref('raw_source_table') }}
```

### When to use views

- **Staging models** — our project convention; staging models are always views
- **Simple transformations** — column renames, type casts, basic filters
- **Small result sets** — where the query runs fast enough that caching isn't needed

### When to avoid views

- Complex joins or aggregations that are slow to compute
- Models queried frequently by dashboards (each query re-runs the SQL)
- Models with many downstream dependents (each dependent re-computes the view)

### Snowflake specifics

- Views in Snowflake are free to store — you only pay compute when they're queried
- Views always show the latest source data (no staleness)
- Snowflake can optimise view queries through its query planner, but complex stacked views (view on view on view) can hit performance limits

### Default in this project

Views are the default for `models/raw/` and `models/staging/` as configured in `dbt_project.yml`:

```yaml
staging:
  +materialized: view
```

You don't need to add `{{ config(materialized='view') }}` to staging models unless you want to be explicit.

## Table

A table stores the query results as a physical table in Snowflake. Each `dbt run` drops and recreates the table.

```sql
{{ config(materialized='table') }}

select
    patient_id,
    count(*) as encounter_count
from {{ ref('stg_encounters') }}
group by patient_id
```

### When to use tables

- **Modelling models** — our project convention for anything below staging
- **Reporting models** — aggregated datasets queried by dashboards
- **Complex transformations** — joins, window functions, heavy aggregations
- **Models with many downstream dependents** — compute once, read many times

### When to avoid tables

- Staging models (use views instead)
- Very large datasets where only new records change (consider incremental)
- Throwaway intermediate logic only used by one downstream model (consider ephemeral)

### Snowflake specifics

- Tables consume storage — you pay for the data at rest
- Snowflake's micro-partition pruning makes table scans efficient when you use `cluster_by`
- Tables are rebuilt from scratch on each run, which can be slow for very large datasets

### Clustering

For large tables, use `cluster_by` to tell Snowflake how to organise the data on disk. This dramatically improves query performance when filtering on the clustered columns:

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='table',
    cluster_by=['practice_code']
) }}
```

Choose clustering columns based on how the table is typically queried — usually the most common filter or join keys. Good candidates:

- `practice_code` — for organisation-level analysis
- `analysis_month` — for time-series queries
- `person_id` — for patient-level lookups

Don't over-cluster. One or two columns is usually enough.

### Default in this project

Tables are the default for `models/modelling/` and `models/reporting/`:

```yaml
modelling:
  +materialized: table
reporting:
  +materialized: table
```

## Incremental

Incremental models only process **new or changed records** instead of rebuilding the entire table. This is much faster for large datasets.

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='incremental',
    unique_key='id',
    incremental_strategy='merge'
) }}

select
    id,
    person_id,
    event_date,
    result_value
from {{ ref('stg_observations') }}
where result_value is not null

{% if is_incremental() %}
    and lds_start_date_time > (select max(lds_start_date_time) from {{ this }})
{% endif %}
```

### How it works

1. **First run** — builds the full table (same as a normal table)
2. **Subsequent runs** — only processes rows matching the `is_incremental()` filter
3. **Merge** — new rows are inserted; existing rows (matched by `unique_key`) are updated
4. **Full refresh** — `dbt run --full-refresh` rebuilds from scratch

### When to use incremental

- Large tables (millions of rows) where only a fraction of data changes
- Event logs, time-series data, or observation records with a clear timestamp
- Tables that take too long to rebuild fully on each run

### When to avoid incremental

- Small tables — the complexity isn't worth it
- Tables where the underlying logic changes frequently (each logic change needs a full refresh)
- Tables where you can't reliably identify "new" records

### Incremental Strategies on Snowflake

| Strategy | Behaviour | Best for |
|----------|-----------|----------|
| `merge` (default) | Insert new rows, update existing (by `unique_key`) | Records that can be updated after initial insert |
| `append` | Insert only, no updates | Immutable event logs |
| `delete+insert` | Delete matching rows then insert | When merge causes issues with complex keys |

### Key Configuration Options

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='incremental',
    unique_key=['person_id', 'analysis_month'],  -- composite key
    incremental_strategy='merge',
    on_schema_change='fail',                      -- fail if columns change
    cluster_by=['analysis_month']                  -- performance optimisation
) }}
```

| Option | Purpose |
|--------|---------|
| `unique_key` | Column(s) to match existing rows. Required for merge/delete+insert. |
| `incremental_strategy` | How to handle new data (merge, append, delete+insert) |
| `on_schema_change` | What to do if columns change: `fail`, `append_new_columns`, `ignore`, `sync_all_columns` |
| `cluster_by` | Snowflake clustering for query performance |

### The `is_incremental()` Block

The `{% if is_incremental() %}` block runs only on incremental runs (not the first run, not full refreshes). Use it to filter for new data:

```sql
{% if is_incremental() %}
    -- Only process records newer than what we already have
    where updated_at > (select max(updated_at) from {{ this }})
{% endif %}
```

`{{ this }}` refers to the current model's existing table in the database.

### Choosing Your Incremental Column

Pick a column that reliably identifies new or changed records:

| Column type | Example | Notes |
|------------|---------|-------|
| Processing timestamp | `lds_start_date_time` | Best choice — catches late-arriving data |
| Event timestamp | `created_at` | Good for append-only data |
| Updated timestamp | `updated_at` | Good for mutable records |
| Business date | `analysis_month` | Good for periodic data |

### Full Refresh

Periodically run a full refresh to catch any data that slipped through the incremental filter (e.g. late-arriving records, retroactive corrections):

```bash
dbt run -s model_name --full-refresh
```

Always test your model with `--full-refresh` after changing its logic to ensure the full and incremental paths produce the same results.

### Example from This Project

Blood pressure observations using merge strategy with a processing timestamp:

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='incremental',
    unique_key=['id', 'source_cluster_id'],
    incremental_strategy='merge',
    cluster_by=['person_id', 'effective_date']
) }}

with base_observations as (
    select
        obs.id,
        obs.person_id,
        obs.clinical_effective_date,
        obs.lds_start_date_time,
        obs.result_value,
        obs.mapped_concept_code as concept_code
    from ({{ get_observations("'BP_COD', 'SYSBP_COD', 'DIASBP_COD'") }}) obs
    where obs.result_value is not null
      and obs.person_id is not null
    {% if is_incremental() %}
      and obs.lds_start_date_time > (select max(lds_start_date_time) from {{ this }})
    {% endif %}
)

select
    id,
    person_id,
    clinical_effective_date as effective_date,
    lds_start_date_time,
    result_value,
    concept_code,
    (concept_code = 'SYSBP_COD') as is_systolic_row,
    (concept_code = 'DIASBP_COD') as is_diastolic_row
from base_observations
```

## Ephemeral

Ephemeral models don't create any database object. Instead, dbt inlines them as CTEs in the downstream model that references them.

```sql
{{ config(materialized='ephemeral') }}

select
    person_id,
    max(event_date) as latest_event_date
from {{ ref('stg_events') }}
group by person_id
```

When a downstream model uses `{{ ref('this_ephemeral_model') }}`, dbt inserts the SQL as a CTE rather than querying a table or view.

### When to use ephemeral

- Intermediate logic used by a single downstream model
- Simple helper queries you don't need to inspect in the database
- Reducing the number of objects in Snowflake when the intermediate result has no standalone value

### When to avoid ephemeral

- When you need to query or debug the intermediate results directly
- When multiple downstream models reference the same ephemeral model (the SQL is duplicated in each)
- When the logic is complex enough that you'd want to test it independently
- When you want the model to appear in dbt docs lineage graphs (ephemeral models are hidden)

### Trade-offs

| Consideration | Ephemeral | View | Table |
|--------------|-----------|------|-------|
| Database object created | No | Yes | Yes |
| Queryable in Snowflake | No | Yes | Yes |
| Visible in lineage | No | Yes | Yes |
| Can be tested independently | No | Yes | Yes |
| Storage cost | None | None | Yes |

In practice, ephemeral models are rarely used in this project. Most intermediate logic either lives as CTEs within a single model file or as a separate `int_` model materialised as a table.

## Choosing the Right Materialisation

```
Is it a staging model?
  └─ Yes → view

Is the result set small (< 1 million rows)?
  └─ Yes → table

Is the table large AND does it have a clear "new data" timestamp?
  └─ Yes → incremental

Is it throwaway logic used by exactly one downstream model?
  └─ Yes → Consider ephemeral (but a CTE in the downstream model is usually simpler)

Everything else → table
```

### Summary by Layer

| Layer | Default | Override when... |
|-------|---------|------------------|
| Raw | View | Never — these are auto-generated |
| Staging | View | Never — staging should always be views |
| Modelling | Table | Use incremental for very large observation/event tables |
| Reporting | Table | Use incremental for large time-series fact tables |
| Published | Table | Never — published data should always be fully rebuilt |

## Further Reading

- [Modelling Guide](modelling-guide.md) — layer principles and naming conventions
- [Snapshots Guide](snapshots-guide.md) — tracking historical changes with slowly changing dimensions
- [Development Guide](development-guide.md) — daily workflows and dbt commands
- [dbt Documentation: Materializations](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/materializations)

Commit message:

docs: add production schedule to materialisation and snapshots guides
Documents the actual build schedule: daily snapshots + daily-tagged models,
full project build on Mondays, full-refresh on the 1st of each month.
Explains how the schedule affects each materialisation type.

https://claude.ai/code/session_01G2Ho1ZKrSS9mrBVL2jq3SP

docs/materialisation-guide.md, after:

# Materialisation Guide

How to choose the right materialisation for your models. This project runs on Snowflake, so guidance here is specific to Snowflake behaviour.

For an introduction to the model layers and when each is used, see the [Modelling Guide](modelling-guide.md).

## Quick Reference

| Materialisation | Creates | Rebuild cost | When to use |
|-----------------|---------|-------------|-------------|
| `view` | SQL view | None (query-time) | Staging models, lightweight transforms |
| `table` | Physical table | Full rebuild each run | Most modelling and reporting models |
| `incremental` | Physical table | Partial rebuild | Large datasets with clear "new data" logic |
| `ephemeral` | Nothing (CTE) | None | One-off intermediate logic, not needed in database |

## View

A view stores the SQL definition but no data. Every time someone queries the view, Snowflake runs the underlying SQL.

```sql
{{ config(materialized='view') }}

select
    key_column,
    cast(date_column as date) as date_column
from {{ ref('raw_source_table') }}
```

### When to use views

- **Staging models** — our project convention; staging models are always views
- **Simple transformations** — column renames, type casts, basic filters
- **Small result sets** — where the query runs fast enough that caching isn't needed

### When to avoid views

- Complex joins or aggregations that are slow to compute
- Models queried frequently by dashboards (each query re-runs the SQL)
- Models with many downstream dependents (each dependent re-computes the view)

### Snowflake specifics

- Views in Snowflake are free to store — you only pay compute when they're queried
- Views always show the latest source data (no staleness)
- Snowflake can optimise view queries through its query planner, but complex stacked views (view on view on view) can hit performance limits

### Default in this project

Views are the default for `models/raw/` and `models/staging/` as configured in `dbt_project.yml`:

```yaml
staging:
  +materialized: view
```

You don't need to add `{{ config(materialized='view') }}` to staging models unless you want to be explicit.

## Table

A table stores the query results as a physical table in Snowflake. Each `dbt run` drops and recreates the table.

```sql
{{ config(materialized='table') }}

select
    patient_id,
    count(*) as encounter_count
from {{ ref('stg_encounters') }}
group by patient_id
```

### When to use tables

- **Modelling models** — our project convention for anything below staging
- **Reporting models** — aggregated datasets queried by dashboards
- **Complex transformations** — joins, window functions, heavy aggregations
- **Models with many downstream dependents** — compute once, read many times

### When to avoid tables

- Staging models (use views instead)
- Very large datasets where only new records change (consider incremental)
- Throwaway intermediate logic only used by one downstream model (consider ephemeral)

### Snowflake specifics

- Tables consume storage — you pay for the data at rest
- Snowflake's micro-partition pruning makes table scans efficient when you use `cluster_by`
- Tables are rebuilt from scratch on each run, which can be slow for very large datasets

### Clustering

For large tables, use `cluster_by` to tell Snowflake how to organise the data on disk. This dramatically improves query performance when filtering on the clustered columns:

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='table',
    cluster_by=['practice_code']
) }}
```

Choose clustering columns based on how the table is typically queried — usually the most common filter or join keys. Good candidates:

- `practice_code` — for organisation-level analysis
- `analysis_month` — for time-series queries
- `person_id` — for patient-level lookups

Don't over-cluster. One or two columns is usually enough.

### Default in this project

Tables are the default for `models/modelling/` and `models/reporting/`:

```yaml
modelling:
  +materialized: table
reporting:
  +materialized: table
```

## Incremental

Incremental models only process **new or changed records** instead of rebuilding the entire table. This is much faster for large datasets.

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='incremental',
    unique_key='id',
    incremental_strategy='merge'
) }}

select
    id,
    person_id,
    event_date,
    result_value
from {{ ref('stg_observations') }}
where result_value is not null

{% if is_incremental() %}
    and lds_start_date_time > (select max(lds_start_date_time) from {{ this }})
{% endif %}
```

### How it works

1. **First run** — builds the full table (same as a normal table)
2. **Subsequent runs** — only processes rows matching the `is_incremental()` filter
3. **Merge** — new rows are inserted; existing rows (matched by `unique_key`) are updated
4. **Full refresh** — `dbt run --full-refresh` rebuilds from scratch

### When to use incremental

- Large tables (millions of rows) where only a fraction of data changes
- Event logs, time-series data, or observation records with a clear timestamp
- Tables that take too long to rebuild fully on each run

### When to avoid incremental

- Small tables — the complexity isn't worth it
- Tables where the underlying logic changes frequently (each logic change needs a full refresh)
- Tables where you can't reliably identify "new" records

### Incremental Strategies on Snowflake

| Strategy | Behaviour | Best for |
|----------|-----------|----------|
| `merge` (default) | Insert new rows, update existing (by `unique_key`) | Records that can be updated after initial insert |
| `append` | Insert only, no updates | Immutable event logs |
| `delete+insert` | Delete matching rows then insert | When merge causes issues with complex keys |

### Key Configuration Options

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='incremental',
    unique_key=['person_id', 'analysis_month'],  -- composite key
    incremental_strategy='merge',
    on_schema_change='fail',                      -- fail if columns change
    cluster_by=['analysis_month']                  -- performance optimisation
) }}
```

| Option | Purpose |
|--------|---------|
| `unique_key` | Column(s) to match existing rows. Required for merge/delete+insert. |
| `incremental_strategy` | How to handle new data (merge, append, delete+insert) |
| `on_schema_change` | What to do if columns change: `fail`, `append_new_columns`, `ignore`, `sync_all_columns` |
| `cluster_by` | Snowflake clustering for query performance |

### The `is_incremental()` Block

The `{% if is_incremental() %}` block runs only on incremental runs (not the first run, not full refreshes). Use it to filter for new data:

```sql
{% if is_incremental() %}
    -- Only process records newer than what we already have
    where updated_at > (select max(updated_at) from {{ this }})
{% endif %}
```

`{{ this }}` refers to the current model's existing table in the database.

### Choosing Your Incremental Column

Pick a column that reliably identifies new or changed records:

| Column type | Example | Notes |
|------------|---------|-------|
| Processing timestamp | `lds_start_date_time` | Best choice — catches late-arriving data |
| Event timestamp | `created_at` | Good for append-only data |
| Updated timestamp | `updated_at` | Good for mutable records |
| Business date | `analysis_month` | Good for periodic data |

### Full Refresh

A full refresh rebuilds the entire table from scratch, ignoring the `is_incremental()` filter. This catches any data that slipped through the incremental filter (e.g. late-arriving records, retroactive corrections).

```bash
dbt run -s model_name --full-refresh
```

In production, the entire project runs with `--full-refresh` on the 1st of every month (see [Project Schedule](#project-schedule)). Always test your model with `--full-refresh` after changing its logic to ensure the full and incremental paths produce the same results.

### Example from This Project

Blood pressure observations using merge strategy with a processing timestamp:

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='incremental',
    unique_key=['id', 'source_cluster_id'],
    incremental_strategy='merge',
    cluster_by=['person_id', 'effective_date']
) }}

with base_observations as (
    select
        obs.id,
        obs.person_id,
        obs.clinical_effective_date,
        obs.lds_start_date_time,
        obs.result_value,
        obs.mapped_concept_code as concept_code
    from ({{ get_observations("'BP_COD', 'SYSBP_COD', 'DIASBP_COD'") }}) obs
    where obs.result_value is not null
      and obs.person_id is not null
    {% if is_incremental() %}
      and obs.lds_start_date_time > (select max(lds_start_date_time) from {{ this }})
    {% endif %}
)

select
    id,
    person_id,
    clinical_effective_date as effective_date,
    lds_start_date_time,
    result_value,
    concept_code,
    (concept_code = 'SYSBP_COD') as is_systolic_row,
    (concept_code = 'DIASBP_COD') as is_diastolic_row
from base_observations
```

## Ephemeral

Ephemeral models don't create any database object. Instead, dbt inlines them as CTEs in the downstream model that references them.

```sql
{{ config(materialized='ephemeral') }}

select
    person_id,
    max(event_date) as latest_event_date
from {{ ref('stg_events') }}
group by person_id
```

When a downstream model uses `{{ ref('this_ephemeral_model') }}`, dbt inserts the SQL as a CTE rather than querying a table or view.

### When to use ephemeral

- Intermediate logic used by a single downstream model
- Simple helper queries you don't need to inspect in the database
- Reducing the number of objects in Snowflake when the intermediate result has no standalone value

### When to avoid ephemeral

- When you need to query or debug the intermediate results directly
- When multiple downstream models reference the same ephemeral model (the SQL is duplicated in each)
- When the logic is complex enough that you'd want to test it independently
- When you want the model to appear in dbt docs lineage graphs (ephemeral models are hidden)

### Trade-offs

| Consideration | Ephemeral | View | Table |
|--------------|-----------|------|-------|
| Database object created | No | Yes | Yes |
| Queryable in Snowflake | No | Yes | Yes |
| Visible in lineage | No | Yes | Yes |
| Can be tested independently | No | Yes | Yes |
| Storage cost | None | None | Yes |

In practice, ephemeral models are rarely used in this project. Most intermediate logic either lives as CTEs within a single model file or as a separate `int_` model materialised as a table.

## Choosing the Right Materialisation

```
Is it a staging model?
  └─ Yes → view

Is the result set small (< 1 million rows)?
  └─ Yes → table

Is the table large AND does it have a clear "new data" timestamp?
  └─ Yes → incremental

Is it throwaway logic used by exactly one downstream model?
  └─ Yes → Consider ephemeral (but a CTE in the downstream model is usually simpler)

Everything else → table
```

### Summary by Layer

| Layer | Default | Override when... |
|-------|---------|------------------|
| Raw | View | Never — these are auto-generated |
| Staging | View | Never — staging should always be views |
| Modelling | Table | Use incremental for very large observation/event tables |
| Reporting | Table | Use incremental for large time-series fact tables |
| Published | Table | Never — published data should always be fully rebuilt |

## Project Schedule

The production build schedule affects how materialisations behave:

| When | What runs | Effect on materialisations |
|------|-----------|---------------------------|
| **Daily** | `dbt snapshot` | All snapshots capture changes |
| **Daily** | `dbt build -s tag:daily` | Daily-tagged models build; incremental models process only new data |
| **Monday** | Full project build | All models rebuild; incremental models process only new data |
| **1st of month** | Full project build with `--full-refresh` | All tables rebuilt from scratch, including incremental models |

### What This Means for You

- **Tables** behave the same regardless of schedule — they're rebuilt from scratch every time they run
- **Incremental models** process only new data on daily/weekly runs, but get a clean rebuild monthly
- **Views** are never "stale" — they always reflect the latest source data when queried
- **Snapshots** run daily to capture any changes before the main build

### Tagging Models for the Daily Build

If your model needs to run daily, add the `daily` tag:

```sql
{{ config(materialized='table', tags=['daily']) }}
```

Or in `dbt_project.yml` at the folder level (already configured for most layers). Models without the `daily` tag will only run on the Monday full build.

## Further Reading

- [Modelling Guide](modelling-guide.md) — layer principles and naming conventions
- [Snapshots Guide](snapshots-guide.md) — tracking historical changes with slowly changing dimensions
- [Development Guide](development-guide.md) — daily workflows and dbt commands
- [dbt Documentation: Materializations](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/materializations)
